


Low-Level Radioactive Waste Act of 2003 (Introduced in Senate)

S 1045 IS 


108th CONGRESS

1st Session

S. 1045
To strengthen United States capabilities to safely and securely dispose of 
all greater-than-Class C low-level radioactive waste. 


IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

May 13, 2003
Mr. AKAKA (for himself, and Mr. BINGAMAN) introduced the following bill; 
which was read twice and referred to the Committee on Energy and Natural 
Resources 



------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--


A BILL
To strengthen United States capabilities to safely and securely dispose of 
all greater-than-Class C low-level radioactive waste. 


Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States 
of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

This Act may be cited as the `Low-Level Radioactive Waste Act of 2003'.

SEC. 2. FINDINGS.

Congress finds that--

(1) section 3(b)(1)(D) of the Low-Level Radioactive Waste Policy Act (42 
U.S.C. 2021c(b)(1)(D)) requires the Secretary of Energy to safely dispose of 
all greater-than-Class C low-level radioactive waste (as defined in section 
61.55 of title 10, Code of Federal Regulations);

(2) the Offsite Source Recovery Program, established by the Department of 
Energy to recover and store sources of such waste, is scheduled to cease 
operation by September 30, 2010;

(3) the Department of Energy estimates that about 14,000 sealed sources of 
such waste will become unwanted and will have to be disposed of through the 
Offsite Source Recovery Program by that date;

(4)(A) in February 1987 the Secretary of Energy submitted to Congress a 
comprehensive report making recommendations for ensuring the safe disposal of 
all greater-than-Class C low-level radioactive waste; and

(B) 16 years later, it is likely that the information contained in the report 
is no longer current and does not reflect the new security threat environment;

(5) the Department of Energy--

(A) does not have the resources or storage facility to recover and store all 
unwanted sources of greater-than-Class C low-level radioactive waste; and

(B) has not identified a permanent disposal facility;

(6) it is unlikely that a permanent disposal facility will be operational by 
the time that the Offsite Source Recovery Program ceases operation;

(7) the initial steps in developing a disposal facility (including 
preparation of an environmental impact statement and issuance of a record of 
decision) could take several years and will require dedicated funding to 
complete; and

(8) before a final decision on the disposal alternative to be implemented is 
made, Congress must have an opportunity to review the alternatives under 
consideration and provide input.

SEC. 3. DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY RESPONSIBILITIES

(a) DESIGNATION OF RESPONSIBILITY- The Secretary of Energy shall designate an 
entity within the Department of Energy to have the responsibility of 
completing activities needed to develop a facility for safely disposing of 
all greater-than-Class C low-level radioactive waste.

(b) CONSULTATION WITH CONGRESS- In developing a plan for a permanent disposal 
facility for greater-than-Class C low-level radioactive waste (including 
preparation of an environmental impact statement and issuance of a record of 
decision), the Secretary of Energy shall consult with Congress.

SEC. 4. REPORTS.

(a) UPDATE OF 1987 REPORT-

(1) IN GENERAL- Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this 
Act, the Secretary of Energy shall submit to Congress an update of the report 
referred to in section 2(4).

(2) CONTENTS- The update shall contain--

(A) an identification of the radioactive waste that is to be disposed of 
(including the source of the waste and the volume, concentration, and other 
relevant characteristics of the waste);

(B) an identification of the Federal and non-Federal options for disposal of 
the waste;

(C) a description of the actions proposed to ensure the safe disposal of the 
waste;

(D) an estimate of the costs of the proposed actions;

(E) an identification of the options for ensuring that the beneficiaries of 
the activities resulting in the generation of the radioactive waste bear all 
reasonable costs of disposing of the waste;

(F) an identification of any statutory authority required for disposal of the 
waste; and

(G) in coordination with the Environmental Protection Agency and the Nuclear 
Regulatory Commission, an identification of any regulatory guidance needed 
for the disposal of the waste.

(b) REPORT ON PERMANENT DISPOSAL FACILITY-

(1) REPORT ON COST AND SCHEDULE FOR COMPLETION OF EIS AND ROD- Not later than 
180 days after the date of submission of the update under subsection (a), the 
Secretary of Energy shall submit to Congress a report containing an estimate 
of the cost and schedule to complete an environmental impact statement and 
record of decision for a permanent disposal facility for greater-than-Class C 
radioactive waste.

(2) REPORT ON ALTERNATIVES- Before the Secretary of Energy makes a final 
decision on the disposal alternative to be implemented, the Secretary of 
Energy shall--

(A) submit to Congress a report that describes all alternatives under 
consideration; and

(B) await action by Congress.

(c) REPORT ON SHORT-TERM PLAN-

(1) IN GENERAL- Not later than December 31, 2003, the Secretary of Energy 
shall submit to Congress a plan to ensure the continued recovery and storage 
of greater-than-Class C low-level radioactive waste until a permanent 
disposal facility is available.

(2) CONTENTS- The plan shall contain estimated cost, resource, and facility 
needs.



===================================



S.1045 
Title: A bill to strengthen United States capabilities to safely and securely 
dispose of all greater-than-Class C low-level radioactive waste. 
Sponsor: Sen Akaka, Daniel K. [HI] (introduced 5/13/2003)      Cosponsors: 2
Latest Major Action: 5/13/2003 Referred to Senate committee. Status: Read 
twice and referred to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources. 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--
COSPONSORS(2), ALPHABETICAL [followed by Cosponsors withdrawn]:     (Sort: by 
date)
Sen Bingaman, Jeff - 5/13/2003 [NM]  Sen Landrieu, Mary - 7/24/2003 [LA]  

SUMMARY AS OF: 
5/13/2003--Introduced.

Low-Level Radioactive Waste Act of 2003 - Instructs the Secretary of Energy 
to designate an entity within the Department of Energy to have the 
responsibility of completing activities needed to develop a facility for 
safely disposing of all greater-than-Class C low-level radioactive waste.

Directs the Secretary to submit to Congress: (1) an update of a specified 
report on radioactive waste; (2) a report containing an estimate of the cost 
and schedule to complete an environmental impact statement and record of 
decision for a permanent disposal facility for greater-than-Class C 
radioactive waste; and (3) a plan to ensure continued recovery and storage of 
greater-than-Class C low-level radioactive waste until a permanent disposal 
facility is available. 

--------


STATEMENTS ON INTRODUCED BILLS AND JOINT RESOLUTIONS -- (Senate - May 13, 
2003)

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--

We are concerned that the program to recover, secure, and store GTCC 
radiological sources is not receiving the 

[Page: S6082]  GPO's PDF
priority it deserves. The disposal of thousands of radiological sources must 
be addressed. But DOE will not be prepared to dispose of these sources 
permanently in the next seven years because DOE has not identified the type 
of facility or provided a cost estimate and time-line for its construction. 
   This bill will address these concerns. To insure the permanent disposal 
program gets the attention it needs within DOE, our legislation requires DOE 
to designate a responsibility entity within DOE to develop a facility for 
disposal of GTCC wastes. 

   It also requires the DOE to report to Congress on the current situation 
and future plans for the disposal of GTCC radioactive waste. After the 
completion of this report, the DOE must submit to Congress a report on the 
cost and schedule to complete an environment impact statement and record of 
decision on a permanent disposal facility for GTCC radioactive wastes. 
Finally, before the year is out, DOE must deliver to Congress a plan to 
provide for the short-term recovery of the GTCC radioactive waste until a 
permanent facility is available. 

   I am also concerned that the short-term Offsite Source Recovery Project 
may lack the funding required to ensure that all designated radiological 
sources are safety and securely recovered in a timely manner. The program 
apparently will be funded adequately through the end of FY04. The FY02 
emergency supplemental budget provided ten millions dollars, and the 
President requested about two millions dollars in his FY04 budget proposal. 
But I caution Congress to keep an eye on this program to guarantee sufficient 
funds are requested in the FY05 budget when it is submitted to Congress next 
year. 

   Thousands of sealed sources await disposal, some requiring security 
measures greater than those in place at current storage sites. The problem 
posed by these sources will not go away by itself. Universities and industry 
do not have the means or facilities to secure these materials and are asking 
the federal government for help. 

   When the United States began non-proliferation efforts in the former 
Soviet Union, one of the first jobs was to begin consolidating nuclear 
weapons and fissile materials in secure facilities to await disposal or 
destruction. As Secretary Abraham has said, due to worries about terrorists 
acquiring dirty bombs, the DOE now is working to secure radiological sources 
overseas. 

   I support these efforts. The bill Senator BINGAMAN and I have introduced 
will give radiological sources and waste on American soil the same 
consideration. Collecting and securing these sources was once a matter of 
public safety. It is now a national security concern that deserves the 
attention of Congress. 

   I ask unanimous consent that the text of the bill be printed in the 
RECORD. 

   There being no objection, the bill was ordered to be printed in the 
RECORD, as follows: 

   S. 1045 

    Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United 
States of America in Congress assembled, 

   SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

    This Act may be cited as the ``Low-Level Radioactive Waste Act of 2003''.

   SEC. 2. FINDINGS.

    Congress finds that--

    (1) section 3(b)(1)(D) of the Low-Level Radioactive Waste Policy Act (42 
U.S.C. 2021c(b)(1)(D)) requires the Secretary of Energy to safely dispose of 
all greater-than-Class C low-level radioactive waste (as defined in section 
61.55 of title 10, Code of Federal Regulations);

    (2) the Offsite Source Recovery Program, established by the Department of 
Energy to recover and store sources of such waste, is scheduled to cease 
operation by September 30, 2010;

    (3) the Department of Energy estimates that about 14,000 sealed sources 
of such waste will become unwanted and will have to be disposed of through 
the Offsite Source Recovery Program by that date;

    (4)(A) in February 1987 the Secretary of Energy submitted to Congress a 
comprehensive report making recommendations for ensuring the safe disposal of 
all greater-than-Class C low-level radioactive waste; and

    (B) 16 years later, it is likely that the information contained in the 
report is no longer current and does not reflect the new security threat 
environment;

    (5) the Department of Energy--

    (A) does not have the resources or storage facility to recover and store 
all unwanted sources of greater-than-Class C low-level radioactive waste; and

    (B) has not identified a permanent disposal facility;

    (6) it is unlikely that a permanent disposal facility will be operational 
by the time that the Offsite Source Recovery Program ceases operation;

    (7) the initial steps in developing a disposal facility (including 
preparation of an environmental impact statement and issuance of a record of 
decision) could take several years and will require dedicated funding to 
complete; and

    (8) before a final decision on the disposal alternative to be implemented 
is made, Congress must have an opportunity to review the alternatives under 
consideration and provide input.

   SEC. 3. DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY RESPONSIBILITIES

    (a) DESIGNATION OF RESPONSIBILITY.--The Secretary of Energy shall 
designate an entity within the Department of Energy to have the 
responsibility of completing activities needed to develop a facility for 
safely disposing of all greater-than-Class C low-level radioactive waste.

    (b) CONSULTATION WITH CONGRESS.--In developing a plan for a permanent 
disposal facility for greater-than-Class C low-level radioactive waste 
(including preparation of an environmental impact statement and issuance of a 
record of decision), the Secretary of Energy shall consult with Congress.

   SEC. 4. REPORTS.

    (a) UPDATE OF 1987 REPORT.--

    (1) IN GENERAL.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of 
this Act, the Secretary of Energy shall submit to Congress an update of the 
report referred to in section 2(4).

    (2) CONTENTS.--The update shall contain--

    (A) an identification of the radioactive waste that is to be disposed of 
(including the source of the waste and the volume, concentration, and other 
relevant characteristics of the waste);

    (B) an identification of the Federal and non-Federal options for disposal 
of the waste;

    (C) a description of the actions proposed to ensure the safe disposal of 
the waste;

    (D) an estimate of the costs of the proposed actions;

    (E) an identification of the options for ensuring that the beneficiaries 
of the activities resulting in the generation of the radioactive waste bear 
all reasonable costs of disposing of the waste; 

    (F) an identification of any statutory authority required for disposal of 
the waste; and

    (G) in coordination with the Environmental Protection Agency and the 
Nuclear Regulatory Commission, an identification of any regulatory guidance 
needed for the disposal of the waste.

    (b) REPORT ON PERMANENT DISPOSAL FACILITY.--

    (1) REPORT ON COST AND SCHEDULE FOR COMPLETION OF EIS AND ROD.--Not later 
than 180 days after the date of submission of the update under subsection 
(a), the Secretary of Energy shall submit to Congress a report containing an 
estimate of the cost and schedule to complete an environmental impact 
statement and record of decision for a permanent disposal facility for 
greater-than-Class C radioactive waste.

    (2) REPORT ON ALTERNATIVES.--Before the Secretary of Energy makes a final 
decision on the disposal alternative to be implemented, the Secretary of 
Energy shall--

    (A) submit to Congress a report that describes all alternatives under 
consideration; and

    (B) await action by Congress.

    (c) REPORT ON SHORT-TERM PLAN.--

    (1) IN GENERAL.--Not later than December 31, 2003, the Secretary of 
Energy shall submit to Congress a plan to ensure the continued recovery and 
storage of greater-than-Class C low-level radioactive waste until a permanent 
disposal facility is available. 

    (2) CONTENTS.--The plan shall contain estimated cost, resource, and 
facility needs.

