RECEIVED TDH JAN 04 1999 BUREAU OF RADIATION CONTROL
===================

December 30, 1998
Ruth E. McBurney, C.H.P.
Director
Division of Licensing, Registration, and Standards
Bureau of Radiation Control
Texas Department of Health
1100 W. 49th Street
Austin. Texas 78756


Attn: Phil Shaver
RE: Waste Control Specialists, LLC
License No. L04971

Dear Ms. McBurney:

Waste Control Specialist LLC requests an amendment to the above referenced Class C license. This
amendment includes:

1. A clarification to condition 22(D) to indicate the processing allowed includes the treatment of
materials as described within the WCS TNRCC Permit.

2. An increase of the limit of the volume of waste present in the Stabilization Building from 3 675
cubic feet to 8,000 cubic feet in condition 23(A)(3).

3. A change to allow bulk unpackaged waste to be inventoried by actual volume within the transport
container in condition 23(B).

4. Removal of the 10-day processing requirement and 30-day waste transfer requirement in the
Stabilization Building, condition 25(A).

In addition, this document officially submits the current resumes listing all pertinent education,
training, and experience for the Management Oversight Representatives, Environmental Health and
Safety Manager, Radiation Safety Supervisor, and the Laboratory Manager, as required in license
condition 14. However, the management organization structure has been modified and the title of the
 Environmental Health and Safety Manger is now the Health and Safety Manager.

The WCS organization chart has been rewritten to divide the Environmental Health and Safety Manager
position and responsibilities into two separate positions; the Health and Safety Manager, and the
Quality Assurance Manager, Environmental Compliance. Both positions report directly to the Facility
 Manager. Additionally, the Health and Safety Officer has been removed and those responsibilities 
 are included in the responsibilities of the Health and Safety Manager. A copy of the organizational 
chart is included with this letter.

The educational requirements for the Health and Safety Manager have been changed to an associate 
degree in industrial/occupational safety, radiological safety, physical science, or sixty (60) hours
of related study and four (4) years experience in industrial/occupational safety in the fields of 
hazardous waste management, environmental science, radiological health, and/or related sciences. 
The educational requirements for the Quality Assurance Manager, Environmental Compliance remain 
the same.

The Management Oversight, Health and Safety Manager, Radiation Safety Supervisor and Laboratory 
Manager positions have been filled with the following individuals whose resumes are included with 
this letter:

	Jesse Walker, Health and Safety Manager
	Lynn Parker, Radiation Safety Supervisor
	Steve Schneider, Laboratory Manager
	Michael Woodward, Management Oversight
	William Dornsife, Management Oversight
	Allen Messenger, Management Oversight
	Mark Turnbough, Management Oversight

ITEM 1:

The process described within condition 22(D)(1) is not consistent with the TNRCC permit for onsite 
treatment of hazardous waste at WCS. This has caused WCS to be disqualified on proposals where 
reviewers were looking for a particular wording. WCS requests the process described in condition 
22(D)(1) include the word "treatment" and a definition for treatment be added to condition 22 or 
condition 15. Two procedures are attached for the treatment of materials in the Permacon or 
equivalent enclosure. The recommended wording for condition 22(D)(1) is:

	"Solidification, stabilization, and treatment of liquid or solid radioactive waste using media
	acceptable to low-level waste disposal sites utilizing a 55 gallon Enrico Barrel Mixer, or
	 equivalent. This use is restricted to the Stabilization Building; and"

The recommended wording, consistent with the TNRCC permit, of a definition for treatment is:

	"Treatment: Material processed by chemical fixation, oxidation, reduction, ph adjustment, or
	other means to meet land disposal requirements."

ITEM 2:

Material in the Stabilization Building is primarily material in transit to other buildings and K061
 waste for processing. Since the K061 waste is not required to be processed inside the Permacon 
Structure, there is more available space in the Stabilization Building for processing waste. WCS 
would like to allow 8,000 cubic feet of material in the Stabilization Building without increasing the 
total volume allowed on site. Condition 23(A)(3) should be increased from 3,675 cubic feet to 8,000 
cubic feet of waste.

ITEM 3:

Bulk unpackaged waste, i.e. material in rolloff bins, is material that is usually disposed of on a 
"per cubic foot" or "unit weight of the material" and the container is returned to the owner. Bulk 
unpackaged material is required to be very low activity by DOT and materials are protected from rain 
by an easily removal cover, usually canvas. Due to the container construction and low activity of 
materials, the volumes are easily verifiable. WCS requests a change in condition 23(B) that would 
allow bulk unpackaged waste to be inventoried by actual volume within the transport container. The 
recommended wording for condition 23(B) is:

	"Any waste container shall be counted as a full container in the volume inventory unless it can 
	be readily verified as empty or actual volume readily determined for bulk unpackaged waste."

ITEM 4:

WCS proposes to remove the time requirements in condition 25(A) for processing all waste within 10 
days of placement within the Stabilization Building and transferring waste out of the Stabilization 
Building within 30 days.  This was a self-imposed time requirement that requires material to be 
unnecessarily moved and handled, which causes additional radiation exposure to our personnel. 
Eliminating condition 25(A) will reduce personnel exposure and facilitate a more practical means of 
tracking waste.

Please contact me at 888/789-2783 if you have any questions or need additional information concerning
 the proposed changes.

Sincerely,
[signed]
David Lee Kania
Radiation Safety Officer

Enclosures: Resumes
WCS Organizational Chart
OP-1.2.18 - Treating Mixed Waste in the Permacon (new)
OP- 1.4.4 - In Drum Treatment Operations (revised)

Cc:
Ken Bigham, WCS, Pasadena
William Dornsife, WCS, Pasadena
Ron Hance, WCS, Andrews
Richard Grondin, WCS, Andrews
Mark Turnbough, MT & Associates
Allen Messenger, AM Environmental
Michael Woodward, Hance, Scarborough, Woodward & Weisbart
file













